Testimony of Governor Edward W. Kelley, Jr.
Y2K and Federal Reserve readiness
Before the Subcommittee on Financial Services and Technology
of the 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
U.S. Senate
July 30, 1997

[SECTION]

I am pleased to appear before the Subcommittee today to
discuss the Federal Reserves efforts to address the Year 2000
computer systems problem.  I will discuss what action is being
taken by the Federal Reserve System to address internal systems,
our supervisory efforts, coordination with the industry, and
contingency planning.

[SECTION]

Year 2000 Readiness
          It is crucial that the Federal Reserve maintain
reliable services to the nations banking system and financial
markets.  I want to assure you that the Federal Reserve is giving
the Year 2000 its highest priority, commensurate with our goal of
maintaining the stability of the nations financial markets and
payments systems, preserving public confidence, and supporting
reliable government operations.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve System has developed and is
executing a comprehensive plan to ensure its own Year 2000
readiness and the bank supervision function is well along in a
cooperative, interagency effort, to promote early remediation and
testing by the industry.  The supervision function is completing
an assessment of the industrys readiness, will examine every
bank subject to our jurisdiction by mid-1998, and will review
their progress as part of all examinations conducted throughout
the remaining months before the millennium.

[SECTION]

We are taking a comprehensive approach to preparedness
which includes assessments of readiness, remediation, testing,
and updating proven plans and techniques used during other times
of operational stress in order to be prepared to address
potential century data change difficulties.  All Federal Reserve
computer program changes, as well as system and user-acceptance
testing, are scheduled to be completed by year-end 1998. 
Further, critical financial services systems that interface with
customers will be Year 2000 ready by mid-1998, permitting
approximately 18 months for customer testing.

[SECTION]

Many top personnel in the Federal Reserve System are
working hard to manage this initiative.  Our staff is putting in
many extra hours to prepare for testing with customers, planning
for business continuity in the event of any unanticipated
internal systems problem, and enhancing our ability to respond to
possible operating failures of depository institutions.  While
there are challenges before us, I can report that we expect to be
fully prepared for the century date change.

[SECTION]

Federal Reserve Readiness
          The Federal Reserve recognized the potential problem
with two-digit date fields more than five years ago when we began 
consolidating our mainframe data processing operations.  Our new
centralized mission-critical applications, such as Fedwire funds
transfer, book-entry securities, and Automated Clearing House,
were designed from inception with Year 2000 compliance in mind. 
The mainframe consolidation effort also necessitated extensive
application standardization, which required us to complete a
comprehensive inventory of our mainframe applications, a
necessary first step to effective remediation.  Like our
counterparts in the private sector, the Federal Reserve System
still faces substantial challenges in achieving Year 2000
readiness.  These challenges include managing a highly complex
project involving multiple interfaces with others, ensuring the
readiness of vendor components, ensuring the readiness of
applications, testing, and establishing contingency plans.  We
are also faced with labor market pressures that call for creative
measures to retain staff who are critical to the success of our
Year 2000 activities.

[SECTION]

According to industry experts, one-quarter of an
organizations Year 2000 compliance efforts are devoted to
project management.  Managing preparations for the century date
change is particularly resource-intensive given the number of
automated systems to be addressed, systems interrelationships and
interdependencies, interfaces with external data sources and
customers, and testing requirements.  In addition, Year 2000
preparations must address computerized environmental systems such
as power, heating and cooling, voice communications, elevators,
and vaults.  In the case of the Federal Reserve, management of
this project is particularly challenging in that it requires
coordination among Reserve Banks, the Board of Governors,
government agencies, numerous vendors and service providers, and
approximately 13,000 customers.

[SECTION]

In late 1995, a Federal Reserve System-wide project was
initiated, referred to as the Century Date Change (CDC) project,
to coordinate the efforts of the Reserve Banks, Federal Reserve
Automation Services (FRAS) -- the Reserve Banks centralized
mainframe data processing and data communications services
organization -  and the Board of Governors.  Our project team is
taking a three-part approach to achieve its objectives, focusing
on planning, readiness, and communication.  Our planning began
with a careful inventory of all applications and establishment of
schedules and support mechanisms to ensure that readiness
objectives are met.  The readiness process involves performing
risk assessments, modifying automated systems, and testing
internally and with depository institutions, service providers,
and government agencies.  Finally, we are stressing effective,
consistent, and timely communication, both internal and external,
to promote awareness and commitment at all levels of our own
organization and the financial services industry, more generally. 
Some of our most senior executives are leading the project and
the Board is now receiving formal status reports at least every
60 days.  Any significant compliance issues will be reported to
the Board immediately.

[SECTION]

A significant challenge in meeting our Year 2000
readiness objectives is our reliance on commercial hardware and
software products and services.  Much of our information
processing and communications infrastructure is comprised of
hardware and software products from third-party vendors. 
Additionally, the Federal Reserve utilizes commercial application
software products and services for certain administrative
functions and other operations.  As a result, we must coordinate
with numerous vendors and manufacturers to ensure that all of our
hardware, software, and services are Year 2000 ready.  In many
cases, compliance will require upgrading, or even replacing,
equipment and software.  We have completed an initial inventory
of vendor components used in our mainframe and distributed
computing environments, and vendor coordination and system change
are progressing well.

[SECTION]

As we continue to assess our systems for Year 2000
readiness, we are preparing a central environment for testing our
payment system applications.  We are establishing isolated
mainframe data processing environments to be used for internal
testing of all system components as well as for testing with
depository institutions and other government agencies.  These
environments will enable testing for high-risk dates such as
year-end 1999, beginning of year 2000, and February 29, 2000
(leap year).  Testing will be conducted through a combination of
future-dating our computer systems to verify the readiness of our
infrastructure, and testing critical future dates within
interfaces to other institutions.  Our test environments will be
available to our customers for testing on a twenty-four hour
basis, six days a week.  Network communications components will
also be tested and certified in a special test lab environment at
FRAS.

[SECTION]

The testing effort for Year 2000 readiness within the
Federal Reserve will be extensive and complex.  Industry experts
estimate that testing for readiness will consume about half of
total Year 2000 project resources.  To leverage existing
resources and processes, we are modeling our Year 2000 testing,
both internally and with depository institutions, on proven
testing methods and processes.  Our customers are already
familiar with these processes and testing environment.  We will
finalize and distribute our testing strategy to depository
institutions by the end of September this year and begin
coordinating test schedules January 1998.  As I noted earlier,
the Reserve Banks are targeting June 1998 to commence testing
with their customers, which allows an 18-month time period for
depository institutions to test their systems with the Federal
Reserve.

[SECTION]

The next challenge I would like to discuss regards
retaining staff critical to the success of the project.  As I
mentioned earlier, we have placed a high priority on our CDC
project, and as such have allocated many of the best managers and
technical staff in the Federal Reserve System to work on the
project.  The information technology industry is already
experiencing market pressures due to the increased demand for
technical talent.  As the millennium draws closer, the global
market requirements for qualified personnel will intensify even
further.  We are responding as necessary to these market-induced
pressures by offering incentives to retain staff members in
critical, high-demand positions.

[SECTION]

Our focus at the Board goes beyond the immediate need
to prepare our systems and ensure reliable operation of the
payments infrastructure.  We are also working hard to address the
supervisory issues raised by Year 2000 and are developing
contingency plans which I will discuss later.

[SECTION]

Supervision Program
          Banks rely heavily on their automated information
processing and telecommunications systems to participate in the
global payments system, to exchange information with
counterparties and regulatory agencies, and to manage their
internal control systems and sophisticated computer equipment. 
As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve has worked actively
with the other banking agencies to advise the industry of our
concerns, and to develop a thorough understanding of the
industrys readiness.  In this regard, the Federal Reserve is
closely monitoring Year 2000 preparations and compliance of the
institutions we supervise so that we can act aggressively to
identify and resolve problems that arise.

[SECTION]

Early this year, the Federal Reserve and the other
regulatory agencies developed a uniform Year 2000 assessment
questionnaire to collect and aggregate information on a national
basis.  We have received over 1000 responses from financial
organizations and service providers supervised by the Federal
Reserve.  Based on these responses and other information, we
believe the banking industrys awareness level has improved
substantially during 1997 and is reflected in the intensified
project management, planning, budgeting, and renovation efforts
that have been initiated.

[SECTION]

Generally speaking, the nations largest banking
organizations have done much to address the issues and have
devoted significant financial and human resources to preparing
for the century date change.  Many larger banks are already
renovating their operating systems and have commenced testing of
their critical applications.  Large organizations appear capable
of renovating their critical operating systems by year-end 1998,
and will have their testing well underway by then.  Some of these
organizations have recently come to realize that their initial
resource and cost estimates to address this project need to be
raised, given the magnitude of the tasks to be performed and the
growing scarcity of available programming staff with the skills
necessary to renovate older systems.

[SECTION]

Smaller banks, including the U.S. offices of foreign
banks and those dependent on a third party to provide their
computer services, are generally aware of the issues and are
working on the problem; however, their progress is less visible
and will be carefully monitored as part of our supervision
program.  Many of these organizations appear to have
underestimated the efforts necessary to ensure that their systems
will be compliant.  Accordingly, we will direct significant
attention to ensure that these banks intensify their efforts to
prepare for the Year 2000.  We intend to update our assessment
periodically in order to maintain a current awareness of the
industrys readiness.

[SECTION]

Our focus on the industrys readiness began last year,
when the Federal Reserve commenced examining banks' plans and
initiatives for the century date change.  Through mid-year 1998
we will continue this program and conduct a thorough Year 2000
preparedness examination of every bank, U.S. branch and agency of
a foreign bank, data processing center, and service provider that
we supervise.  Our examination program includes an extensive
review of each institution's Year 2000 project management plans
in order to evaluate their sufficiency, to ensure the direct
involvement of senior management and the board of directors, and
to monitor their progress against the plan.  Our examiners are
actively engaged in ensuring that the board of directors and
senior management are addressing the issues and assembling the
necessary resources.  Based on the examination results and the
findings collected during the current assessment program, we are
identifying those institutions that require intensified
supervisory attention and establish our priorities for subsequent
examinations.

[SECTION]

Public Awareness
          We are mindful that extensive communication with the
industry and the public is crucial to the success of our efforts. 
Our public awareness program includes communications related to
our testing efforts and our overall concerns about the industrys
readiness.  We continue to advise our customers of the Federal
Reserves plans and time frames for making our software Year 2000
ready.  We have inaugurated a Year 2000 newsletter and have just
published our first bulletin addressing specific technical
issues.  Copies of our recent newsletter and the bulletin are
provided as Attachments 1 and 2, respectively.  We have also
established an Internet Web site to provide depository
institutions with information regarding the Federal Reserve
Systems CDC project.  This site can be accessed at the following
Internet address: http://www.frbsf.org/fiservices/cdc.

[SECTION]

To heighten the industrys awareness level, the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), issued a
policy statement on May 5th entitled  "Year 2000 Project
Management Awareness,"  which updates the supervisory guidance
first issued in 1996.  The statement emphasizes the regulators
concerns that inability to provide a compliant hardware and
software environment to support the upcoming century date change
would expose a bank to inordinate operational, financial, and
legal risks.  A set of uniform examination procedures
accompanying the statement provides guidance for examiners as
well as bank management, stressing the need for sponsorship at
the highest levels of the organization to effectively manage the
remediation process and address any deficiencies that may
surface.

[SECTION]

Bank management must not only be aware of the many Year
2000 problems, but must also be sensitive to the magnitude of the
efforts needed to achieve compliance and the consequent budgetary
implications.  Industry experts maintain that costs to perform
Year 2000 renovation tasks will increase as the demand for
skilled information technology professionals grows.  Accordingly,
the interagency policy statement emphasizes the need for bank
management to be aggressive in securing sufficient human and
computer resources.  The statement also encourages banks to be
largely completed with their renovation and well into testing of
their major applications by year-end 1998 so that any substantive
problems can be addressed in 1999.

[SECTION]

The statement also calls upon banks to consider the
Year 2000 risks posed by their borrowers and customers, as banks
could be adversely affected by borrowers who are not prepared for
Year 2000 processing.  Corporate customers who have not
considered Year 2000 issues may experience a disruption in
business, resulting in financial difficulties that could
negatively influence their creditworthiness.  Examiners now
verify that a bank incorporates a borrowers Year 2000
preparedness into its underwriting standards, and that loan
officers assess the extent of Year 2000 computer problems that
may influence a borrowers ability to repay its loans on a timely
basis.

[SECTION]

On behalf of the FFIEC, the Federal Reserve has
developed a Year 2000 information distribution system, including
an Internet web site and a toll free Fax Back service (888-882-
0982).  The web site provides easy access to policy statements,
guidance to examiners, and paths to other Year 2000 web sites
available from numerous other sources.  The site has been used
heavily since its introduction in early May of this year.  The
FFIEC Year 2000 web site can be accessed at the following
Internet address: http://www.ffiec.gov/y2k.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve has also produced a ten-minute
video entitled  "Year 2000 Executive Awareness"  intended for
viewing by a banks board of directors and senior management. 
The video presents a summary of the Year 2000 five-phase project
management plan outlined in the interagency policy statement.  In
my introductory remarks on the video, I note that senior bank
officials should be directly involved in managing the Year 2000
project to ensure that it is given the appropriate level of
attention and sufficient resources to address the issue on a
timely basis.  The video has already been distributed to banks
and their service providers, and can be ordered through the
Boards Web site.

[SECTION]

We are also taking steps to provide this information to
foreign bank supervisors.  With regard to the international
aspects of the Year 2000 issue, U.S. offices of foreign banks
pose a unique set of challenges.  Based on our assessments, we
are concerned that some offices may not have an adequate
appreciation of the magnitude and ramifications of the problem,
and may not have committed the resources necessary to address the
issues effectively.  This is a particular concern for foreign
bank offices that are dependent on their foreign parent bank for
information processing systems.

[SECTION]

Therefore, we are working through the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) committee of bank supervisors
composed of many of the international agencies responsible for
the foreign banks that operate in the U.S.  Through several
presentations and the distribution of the interagency statement
and the Year 2000 video to the BIS Supervisors Committee, we have
sought to elevate foreign bank supervisors awareness of the
risks posed by the century date change and to solicit their
assistance in monitoring the state of overall preparedness of
foreign bank parents to ensure that they consider the needs of
their U.S. offices.

[SECTION]

We are also participating in the BIS Group of Computer
Experts meeting of G-10 and non-G-10 central banks in September
which provides a forum to share views on and approaches to
dealing with Year 2000 issues and have been active in various
private sector forums.  The participants will discuss their
involvement with raising bank industry awareness, remediation of
payment systems, and the readiness of the central banks' internal
systems.  Information garnered from this meeting will assist the
BIS Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, as well as the
Federal Reserve, in understanding the current state of
preparedness of payment systems on a global level.

[SECTION]

Contingency Planning
          Because smooth and uninterrupted financial flows are
obviously of utmost importance, our main focus is our
preparedness and the avoidance of problems.  But we know from
experience that upon occasion, things can go wrong.   Given our
unique role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has
always stressed contingency planning -- for both systemic risks
as well as operational failures.

[SECTION]

In this regard, we regularly conduct exhaustive
business resumption tests of our major payment systems that
include depository institutions.  Moreover, as a result of our
experience in responding to problems arising from such diverse
events as earthquakes, fires, storms, and power outages, as well
as liquidity problems in institutions, we expect to be well
positioned to deal with problems in the financial sector that
might arise as a result of CDC.  We are, of course, developing
specific CDC contingency plans to address various operational
scenarios.  Our existing business resumption plans will be
updated to address date-related difficulties that may face the
financial industry.

[SECTION]

We already have arrangements in place to assist
financial institutions in the event they are unable to access
their own systems.  For example, we are able to provide financial
institutions with access to Federal Reserve computer terminals on
a limited bases for the processing of critical funds transfers. 
This contingency arrangement has proven highly effective when
used from time to time by depository institutions experiencing
major hardware/software outages or that have had their operations
disrupted due to natural disasters such as the Los Angeles
earthquake, hurricane Hugo in the Carolinas, and hurricane Andrew
in south Florida.  In these cases we worked closely with
financial institutions to ensure that adequate supplies of cash
were available to the community and also arranged for our
operations to function virtually without interruptions for 24
hours a day during the crisis period.  We feel the experience
gained from such crises will prove very helpful in the event of
similar problems triggered by century date change.  We are also
beginning to formulate responses for augmenting certain
functions, such as computer help desk services and off-line funds
transfers, to respond to short-term needs for these services.

[SECTION]

Although operational contingency is something that the
Federal Reserve is confronted with on a daily basis, preparation
for contingencies in the century date change environment does
offer some new and significant challenges.  For example, in the
software application arena, the normal contingency of falling
back to a prior release of the software is not a viable option. 
This underscores the importance of the rigorous assessment and
testing to which all applications must be subjected.

[SECTION]

Beyond reliance on a sound plan and effective execution
of the plan, the Federal Reserve is not totally dependent upon
any single system for executing payment orders.  While we have
very sophisticated automated systems in place, such as Fedwire
and our Automated Clearing House systems, we also operate paper-
based payment systems that offer a set of alternatives in the
event of a disruption in a segment of the electronic payment
system.

[SECTION]

Clearly, the Federal Reserve and other bank supervisors
expect depository institutions to work diligently and effectively
to ensure that automation issues associated with the Year 2000
are resolved fully and in a timely fashion.  However, we
anticipate that at least a few financial institutions will
experience difficulty in completing their Year 2000 preparations
in a timely manner, and we are developing plans to address such
cases.  The Federal Reserve will identify and monitor these
organizations closely and work to ensure that senior management
and boards of directors are aware of their Year 2000 issues, cost
implications, and possible consequences.  A banks need for
adequate preparation for the Year 2000 is regarded as a safety
and soundness issue.  Where progress is deemed to be
substantively less than satisfactory, resulting in excessive risk
and a possibly unsafe or unsound condition, we will address the
issue in a manner consistent with our long-standing supervisory
approach to dealing with other safety and soundness issues.  The
full range of our supervisory tools and remedies are available,
including intensified monitoring, progressively more detailed
reporting requirements, presentations to the board of directors,
insistence on bank commitments to initiate corrective action,
and, ultimately, possible use of enforcement actions as
appropriate.

[SECTION]

We recognize, nonetheless, that despite their best
efforts, some depository institutions may experience operating
difficulties, either as a result of their own computer problems
or those of their customers, counterparties, or others.  These
problems could be manifested in a number of ways and would not
necessarily involve funding shortfalls.  Nevertheless, the
Federal Reserve is always prepared to provide information to
depository institutions on the balances in their accounts with us
throughout the day, so that they can identify shortfalls and seek
funding in the market.  The Federal Reserve will be prepared to
lend in appropriate circumstances and with adequate collateral to
depository institutions when market sources of funding are not
reasonably available.  The terms and conditions of such lending
may depend upon the circumstances giving rise to the liquidity
shortfall.

[SECTION]

Discussions are also underway with the other federal
banking agencies to ensure that we are jointly prepared to
address the challenge resulting from serious operating problems. 
If such operating problems were not correctable within a
reasonable time frame, it could necessitate a federal resolution
comparable to that used for a bank that has become capital
insolvent.

[SECTION]

Our preparations for possible liquidity difficulties
also extend to the foreign bank branches and agencies in the U.S.
that may be adversely affected directly by their own computer 
systems or through difficulties caused by the linkage and
dependence on their parent bank.  Such circumstances would
necessitate coordination with the home country supervisor. 
Moreover, consistent with current policy, foreign central banks
will be expected to provide liquidity support to any foreign
banking organizations that experience a funding shortfall.

[SECTION]

Closing Remarks
          As I indicated at the outset, the Federal Reserve views
its Year 2000 preparations with great seriousness.  As such, we
have placed a high priority on the remediation of date problems
in our systems and the development of action plans that will
ensure business continuity for the critical financial systems we
operate.  While we have made significant progress in validating
our internal systems and planning for testing with depository
institutions and others using Federal Reserve services, we must
work to ensure that our efforts remain on schedule and that
problems are addressed in a timely fashion.  In particular, we
will be paying special attention to the testing needs of
depository institutions and the financial industry and are
prepared to adjust our support for them as required by
experience.  We believe that we are well-positioned to meet our
objectives and will remain vigilant throughout the process.

[SECTION]

As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve will continue
to address the industrys preparedness, monitor progress, and
target for special supervisory attention those organizations that
are most in need of assistance.  Lastly, we will continue to
participate in international forums with the expectation that
these efforts will help foster an international awareness of Year
2000 issues and provide for the sharing of experiences, ideas,
and best practices.

[SECTION]

Return to top

[SECTION]

1997 Testimony 



Home | News and events 
Accessibility | Contact Us

Last update: July 30, 1997 1:00 PM